PLAN.md, before:

# Implementation Plan

Based on analysis of [prior work](PRIOR_WORK.md) and manual simulation.

## Core Approach

### Variable-Length Blocks

**Key Insight:** Italian and English word order differs. Insert line breaks only at block boundaries where word order allows natural alignment.

**Example (lines 41-43):**
- Italian order: 41→42→43 (hope/me, beast, hour/season)
- Norton order: 43→41→42 (hour/season, hope/me, beast)
- **Solution:** Treat as single 3-line block

### Data Sources

1. `tokenize/inferno/01.txt` - Italian with tokens: `line|token1|token2|...`
2. `en-norton/inferno/01.txt` - Norton prose (parsed via `dante_norton.Canto`)

## Algorithm

### Processing Flow

```
For each Norton paragraph:
    italian_block = []

    For each Italian line:
        Add line to italian_block
        Query LLM for word correspondences

        Check if block complete:
            - Replace matched words with "#" in Norton text
            - If prefix (start to last #) has no letters → complete
            - Else → continue to next line
```

### Matching Check (Core Logic)

```python
# Step 1: Replace matched words with "#"
test_text = norton_paragraph
for word in matched_words:
    test_text = test_text.replace(word, "#" * len(word), 1)

# Step 2: Check prefix
last_hash = test_text.rfind("#")
prefix = test_text[:last_hash + 1]

# Step 3: Block complete if no alphabetic chars in prefix
if not re.search(r'[a-zA-Z]', prefix):
    # Block complete - insert line break
else:
    # Continue - add next Italian line
```

## Manual Simulation Results

### Test: Line 1

**Italian:** `Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita`

**Norton:** `Midway upon the road of our life I found myself within a dark wood...`

**Critical Discovery - Multi-word mappings:**
- `Nel mezzo` (2 tokens) → `Midway` (1 word)
- `del` (1 token) → `upon the` (2 words) - Norton's interpretation, not literal "of the"

### Gap Detection Problem

With incorrect literal matching, we get "islands":

```
"####### #### ### #### ## ### #### I found myself ###### a dark wood..."
 ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^    ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^
 Matched at start                  Gap            Island (error!)
```

**Gap = error signal.** Matched words should be continuous from the start.

**Gap detection function:**
```python
def has_gap(text):
    # Find first alphabetic character
    first_alpha = next((i for i, c in enumerate(text) if c.isalpha()), None)
    if first_alpha is None:
        return False
    # Check if "#" appears after it (= island)
    return '#' in text[first_alpha:]
```

### With Correct Matching

Using correct correspondences (Nel mezzo→Midway, del→upon the):
```
Matched: ["Midway", "upon", "the", "road", "of", "our", "life"]
Result:  "####### #### ### #### ## ### #### I found myself..."
Prefix:  "####### #### ### #### ## ### ####"
Alphabetic? NO
✓ Block complete after line 1
```

### Key Insight

**Goal: Correct line breaks, not perfect word matching.**

Implications:
- Imperfect word matching tolerable if block boundaries correct
- Can fallback to block-level validation when word-level fails

## Implementation Strategy

### Hybrid Approach with Fallback

**Primary: Word-level matching**
```
For each token, ask LLM:
"Italian: {block} / English: {paragraph}
 What English word(s) correspond to '{token}'? (may be multiple words)"
```

**Fallback: Block-level validation**

If gap detected or word-level unreliable:
```
Ask LLM:
"Italian lines: {lines}
 English text: {paragraph}
 Does English contain COMPLETE translation of Italian from paragraph start?
 Answer: YES or NO"
```

**Strategy:**
1. Try word-level matching
2. Detect gaps → retry with multi-word prompt
3. Still has gaps → fallback to block validation
4. Log which method succeeded

### LLM Configuration

- Local LLM via Ollama (Llama 3.1/3.2, Qwen 2.5, Mistral)
- Process one paragraph at a time (keep context light)
- Assumption: Word order inversions don't cross paragraphs

## Success Criteria

**Phase 1 (20 lines):**
- ✓ Block boundaries identified (either method)
- ✓ Sensible line breaks on visual inspection
- ✓ No crashes/infinite loops

**Acceptable:**
- Some blocks need fallback validation
- Gaps detected frequently (improve prompts later)

**Concerns requiring adjustment:**
- Block validation also fails
- Paragraph assumption breaks

## Implementation Results

### Current Implementation (alignment/align_canto.py)

**Approach:** Line-based extraction with structured output and LLM self-validation

**Core Components:**

1. **Structured Output Schemas (Pydantic):**
   - `ExtractionResult`: Forces LLM to output clean English text (no extra quotes/formatting)
   - `ValidationResult`: Forces structured validation (status: CORRECT/EXTRA_IN_ENGLISH/EXTRA_IN_ITALIAN, reason)
   - Uses `llm7shi.create_json_descriptions_prompt` for Ollama compatibility

2. **Extraction Phase:**
   - Input: Italian lines + Norton English paragraph
   - LLM extracts corresponding English text
   - Structured output ensures clean result without extra formatting

3. **Validation Phase (LLM Self-Validation):**
   - Separate LLM call validates Italian-English correspondence
   - Question: "Is the English a valid translation of the Italian?"
   - Emphasizes: Literary translation (meaning equivalence, not word-for-word)
   - Evaluation criteria:
     - `CORRECT`: English matches exactly (no more, no less)
     - `EXTRA_IN_ENGLISH`: English is TOO LONG (includes content from other Italian lines)
     - `EXTRA_IN_ITALIAN`: English is TOO SHORT (missing Italian content)

4. **Retry Logic (max 3 attempts):**
   - `EXTRA_IN_ENGLISH`: Clear history, re-extract with emphasis on SHORTER text
   - `EXTRA_IN_ITALIAN`: Clear history, retry with original prompt
   - Always re-extract from original Norton text (not from LLM's previous output)

5. **Position Verification:**
   - Check if extracted text appears at beginning of remaining Norton text
   - Allows minor punctuation differences (normalized comparison)

6. **Gap Detection & Block Completion:**
   - Replace matched words with "#"
   - Check prefix for alphabetic characters
   - Gap detected → Continue to next Italian line
   - No gap → Block complete

### Test Results

#### Test 1: Lines 1-3 (Initial Success)

**Input:** 3 Italian lines
**Output:** 2 blocks ✓

```
Block 1 (1 line):
  Italian: Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita
  English: Midway upon the road of our life

Block 2 (2 lines):
  Italian: mi ritrovai per una selva oscura,
          ché la diritta via era smarrita.
  English: I found myself within a dark wood, for the right way had been missed
```

**Key Success:**
- Variable-length blocks working correctly
- Line 2-3 correctly merged (Italian 2 lines = English 1 sentence)
- Validation successfully detected and corrected over-extraction in Line 2

#### Test 2: Lines 1-9 (Challenges)

**Issue:** Line 1 over-extraction persists across retries
- Extraction: `Midway upon the road of our life I found myself within a dark wood`
- Validation correctly detects: `EXTRA_IN_ENGLISH`
- Retry attempts produce same over-extraction
- Fails after 3 attempts

**Root Cause:** Small model (ministral-3:14b) has difficulty with fine-grained adjustments

### Current Status

**Working:**
- ✓ Structured output eliminates formatting issues (no extra quotes)
- ✓ LLM self-validation accurately detects over/under-extraction
- ✓ Variable-length blocks (multiple Italian lines → one English sentence)
- ✓ Gap detection prevents premature block completion
- ✓ Clean JSON-based validation logs

**Challenges:**
- ✗ Small model (14B) struggles with retry refinement
- ✗ When over-extraction occurs, retries often produce same result
- ✗ Line 1 over-extraction prevents processing of subsequent lines

**Model Limitations (ministral-3:14b):**
- Good at: Detecting problems (validation)
- Weak at: Refining extractions based on feedback
- Temperature: 0.3 (further reduction may help)

### Lessons Learned

1. **Structured output is essential:**
   - Eliminates parsing errors from free-form text
   - Forces consistent JSON format
   - Works well with Ollama via `create_json_descriptions_prompt`

2. **LLM self-validation works:**
   - Can accurately judge over/under-extraction
   - Concrete examples in prompts are critical
   - Simple rules ("TOO LONG" / "TOO SHORT") more effective than abstract concepts

3. **Small models have limits:**
   - Can validate well but struggle with fine corrections
   - May need larger model (70B+) for reliable retry success
   - Or need different retry strategy (not just "make it shorter")

4. **Re-extraction must use original source:**
   - Always extract from original Norton text
   - Never extract from LLM's previous output
   - Clear history on each retry to avoid confusion

### Next Steps

1. **Test with larger model:**
   - Try Qwen 2.5 70B or similar
   - May provide better retry refinement

2. **Alternative retry strategies:**
   - Provide specific word count limits
   - Show negative examples in retry prompt
   - Use different temperature for retries

3. **Fallback mechanism:**
   - If extraction fails after 3 attempts, try block-level validation
   - Or allow partial success and continue with warnings

4. **Test success rate:**
   - Run full canto with current approach
   - Measure: % of lines that succeed on first try, % that need retries, % that fail

---

## Improved Implementation (2026-02-05)

### Key Changes

**1. Hybrid Approach: Plain Text Extraction + Structured Validation**
- **Extraction:** Removed structured output (JSON schema) → Plain text output
  - Rationale: Structured output reduces LLM flexibility for extraction tasks
  - LLM outputs text directly, parsed as-is
- **Validation:** Kept structured output (JSON schema) with simplified YES/NO
  - `reason` field first → Chain of Thought (CoT)
  - `answer` field second → Final judgment
  - Rationale: Validation needs structured decision-making

**2. Fixed Island Detection Algorithm**
- Previous implementation had inverted logic
- Correct implementation (per PLAN.md):
  ```python
  # Find first alphabetic character
  first_alpha_idx = next((i for i, c in enumerate(test_text) if c.isalpha()), None)
  if first_alpha_idx is None:
      return True  # No unmatched text, block complete
  # Check if "#" appears after first alpha (= island)
  has_island = '#' in test_text[first_alpha_idx:]
  return not has_island  # Complete if no island
  ```

**3. Enhanced Prompts**
- **Extraction:** Added length hints based on Italian line count
- **Validation:** Emphasized literary translation tolerance
  - Minor nuance differences acceptable
  - Focus on content equivalence, not word-for-word matching

### Test Results (Lines 1-9)

**Success (Lines 1-3):**
- Line 1: "Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita" → "Midway upon the road of our life" ✓
- Line 2: "mi ritrovai per una selva oscura," → "I found myself within a dark wood" ✓
- Line 3: "ché la diritta via era smarrita." → "for the right way had been missed" ✓
- All succeeded on first attempt, no retries needed

**Partial Success (Lines 4-5):**
- Challenge: Lines 4-5 form a single English sentence
  - Italian: "Ahi quanto a dir qual era è cosa dura / esta selva selvaggia e aspra e forte"
  - English: "Ah! how hard a thing it is to tell what this wild and rough and dense wood was"
- Issue: Line 4 extraction includes Line 5 content
  - Extracted (Line 4 only): "Ah! how hard a thing it is to tell what this wild and rough and dense wood was"
  - Validation: YES (incorrect - should detect Line 5 content)
  - Length: IT=9 words, EN=18 words (2x ratio)
  - Island detection: False → Block marked complete (incorrect)
- Line 5 then fails (remaining text doesn't match)

### Current Challenge

**Validation Accuracy:**
- LLM validation accepts extractions that are too long
- Example: 18-word English for 9-word Italian
- LLM reasoning: "acceptable in literary translation"
- Need: More strict length validation or explicit multi-line detection

**Root Cause:**
- Italian poetry uses enjambment (lines break mid-sentence)
- Line 4 alone: "Ahi quanto a dir qual era è cosa dura" (how hard to say what it was)
- Line 4 includes "what it was" which naturally expands to "what this wild... wood was"
- LLM sees this as semantically valid, not detecting that the expansion comes from Line 5

### Possible Solutions

**1. Length Ratio Check:**
- Add hard constraint: English/Italian word ratio > 2.0 → reject
- Risk: May reject legitimate literary expansions

**2. Stricter Validation Prompt:**
- Explicitly ask: "Does the English include descriptive details not in this Italian line?"
- Emphasize: "Line 4 alone" vs "Lines 4-5 together"

**3. Multi-line Lookahead:**
- When extraction seems too long, check if next Italian line is needed
- Compare extraction against Lines 4-5 together

**4. Accept Current Behavior:**
- Lines 1-3 work perfectly
- Lines 4-5 represent edge case (enjambment with content expansion)
- May need human review for such cases

---

## Implementation Results (Updated)

### Current Implementation (alignment/align_canto.py)

**Approach:** Two-stage extraction with modern translation as semantic bridge

**Core Components:**

1. **Stage 1: Modern Translation**
   - Translate Italian to simple, modern English
   - Provides clear semantic reference independent of Norton's literary style
   - Single lines translated individually; multi-line blocks translated together

2. **Stage 2: Norton Text Extraction**
   - Use modern translation as meaning reference
   - Extract semantically equivalent text from Norton's literary translation
   - LLM matches meaning, not word-for-word

3. **Validation (Structured Output):**
   - Validates semantic equivalence between modern translation and extracted Norton text
   - Chain of Thought reasoning + YES/NO decision
   - Hard length ratio constraint (>1.8x rejects extraction)

4. **Enjambment Handling:**
   - When extraction fails with 1 line, automatically retry with N+1 lines
   - Successfully handles cases like Lines 4-5 where Italian poetry uses enjambment
   - Block expands until meaningful extraction succeeds

5. **Quote Stripping:**
   - Removes leading/trailing quotation marks from LLM output
   - Ensures clean text matching against Norton source

### Test Results (Lines 1-9)

**Success: 8 blocks from 9 lines**

```
Block 1 (1 line): Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita
                  → Midway upon the road of our life

Block 2 (1 line): mi ritrovai per una selva oscura
                  → I found myself within a dark wood

Block 3 (1 line): ché la diritta via era smarrita
                  → for the right way had been missed

Block 4 (2 lines): Ahi quanto a dir qual era è cosa dura / esta selva selvaggia e aspra e forte
                   → Ah! how hard a thing it is to tell what this wild and rough and dense wood was
                   [Enjambment detected: 2 Italian lines → 1 English sentence]

Block 5 (1 line): che nel pensier rinova la paura
                  → which in thought renews the fear

Block 6 (1 line): Tant' è amara che poco è più morte
                  → So bitter is it that death is little more

Block 7 (1 line): ma per trattar del ben ch'i' vi trovai
                  → But in order to treat of the good that there I found

Block 8 (1 line): dirò de l'altre cose ch'i' v'ho scorte
                  → I will tell of the other things that I have seen there
```

**Key Success:**
- Lines 1-3: Perfect individual line alignment
- Lines 4-5: Automatic enjambment detection and merging
- Lines 6-9: Correct individual alignments

### Current Status

**Working:**
- ✓ Two-stage approach (modern translation → Norton extraction)
- ✓ Semantic matching handles literary translation differences
- ✓ Automatic enjambment detection via retry mechanism
- ✓ Structured validation with length ratio guards
- ✓ Clean extraction without quotation mark artifacts

**Next Steps:**
1. Test with full canto (136 lines)
2. Measure success rate and identify edge cases
3. Optimize for speed (caching translations, parallel processing)
4. Add human review interface for uncertain alignments

Commit message:

Update PLAN.md with symmetric quote stripping and punctuation preservation
- Document symmetric quote stripping (only when fully enclosed)
- Update test results with correct punctuation
- Add punctuation restoration to working features list

PLAN.md, after:

# Implementation Plan

Based on analysis of [prior work](PRIOR_WORK.md) and manual simulation.

## Core Approach

### Variable-Length Blocks

**Key Insight:** Italian and English word order differs. Insert line breaks only at block boundaries where word order allows natural alignment.

**Example (lines 41-43):**
- Italian order: 41→42→43 (hope/me, beast, hour/season)
- Norton order: 43→41→42 (hour/season, hope/me, beast)
- **Solution:** Treat as single 3-line block

### Data Sources

1. `tokenize/inferno/01.txt` - Italian with tokens: `line|token1|token2|...`
2. `en-norton/inferno/01.txt` - Norton prose (parsed via `dante_norton.Canto`)

## Algorithm

### Processing Flow

```
For each Norton paragraph:
    italian_block = []

    For each Italian line:
        Add line to italian_block
        Query LLM for word correspondences

        Check if block complete:
            - Replace matched words with "#" in Norton text
            - If prefix (start to last #) has no letters → complete
            - Else → continue to next line
```

### Matching Check (Core Logic)

```python
# Step 1: Replace matched words with "#"
test_text = norton_paragraph
for word in matched_words:
    test_text = test_text.replace(word, "#" * len(word), 1)

# Step 2: Check prefix
last_hash = test_text.rfind("#")
prefix = test_text[:last_hash + 1]

# Step 3: Block complete if no alphabetic chars in prefix
if not re.search(r'[a-zA-Z]', prefix):
    # Block complete - insert line break
else:
    # Continue - add next Italian line
```

## Manual Simulation Results

### Test: Line 1

**Italian:** `Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita`

**Norton:** `Midway upon the road of our life I found myself within a dark wood...`

**Critical Discovery - Multi-word mappings:**
- `Nel mezzo` (2 tokens) → `Midway` (1 word)
- `del` (1 token) → `upon the` (2 words) - Norton's interpretation, not literal "of the"

### Gap Detection Problem

With incorrect literal matching, we get "islands":

```
"####### #### ### #### ## ### #### I found myself ###### a dark wood..."
 ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^    ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^
 Matched at start                  Gap            Island (error!)
```

**Gap = error signal.** Matched words should be continuous from the start.

**Gap detection function:**
```python
def has_gap(text):
    # Find first alphabetic character
    first_alpha = next((i for i, c in enumerate(text) if c.isalpha()), None)
    if first_alpha is None:
        return False
    # Check if "#" appears after it (= island)
    return '#' in text[first_alpha:]
```

### With Correct Matching

Using correct correspondences (Nel mezzo→Midway, del→upon the):
```
Matched: ["Midway", "upon", "the", "road", "of", "our", "life"]
Result:  "####### #### ### #### ## ### #### I found myself..."
Prefix:  "####### #### ### #### ## ### ####"
Alphabetic? NO
✓ Block complete after line 1
```

### Key Insight

**Goal: Correct line breaks, not perfect word matching.**

Implications:
- Imperfect word matching tolerable if block boundaries correct
- Can fallback to block-level validation when word-level fails

## Implementation Strategy

### Hybrid Approach with Fallback

**Primary: Word-level matching**
```
For each token, ask LLM:
"Italian: {block} / English: {paragraph}
 What English word(s) correspond to '{token}'? (may be multiple words)"
```

**Fallback: Block-level validation**

If gap detected or word-level unreliable:
```
Ask LLM:
"Italian lines: {lines}
 English text: {paragraph}
 Does English contain COMPLETE translation of Italian from paragraph start?
 Answer: YES or NO"
```

**Strategy:**
1. Try word-level matching
2. Detect gaps → retry with multi-word prompt
3. Still has gaps → fallback to block validation
4. Log which method succeeded

### LLM Configuration

- Local LLM via Ollama (Llama 3.1/3.2, Qwen 2.5, Mistral)
- Process one paragraph at a time (keep context light)
- Assumption: Word order inversions don't cross paragraphs

## Success Criteria

**Phase 1 (20 lines):**
- ✓ Block boundaries identified (either method)
- ✓ Sensible line breaks on visual inspection
- ✓ No crashes/infinite loops

**Acceptable:**
- Some blocks need fallback validation
- Gaps detected frequently (improve prompts later)

**Concerns requiring adjustment:**
- Block validation also fails
- Paragraph assumption breaks

## Implementation Results

### Current Implementation (alignment/align_canto.py)

**Approach:** Line-based extraction with structured output and LLM self-validation

**Core Components:**

1. **Structured Output Schemas (Pydantic):**
   - `ExtractionResult`: Forces LLM to output clean English text (no extra quotes/formatting)
   - `ValidationResult`: Forces structured validation (status: CORRECT/EXTRA_IN_ENGLISH/EXTRA_IN_ITALIAN, reason)
   - Uses `llm7shi.create_json_descriptions_prompt` for Ollama compatibility

2. **Extraction Phase:**
   - Input: Italian lines + Norton English paragraph
   - LLM extracts corresponding English text
   - Structured output ensures clean result without extra formatting

3. **Validation Phase (LLM Self-Validation):**
   - Separate LLM call validates Italian-English correspondence
   - Question: "Is the English a valid translation of the Italian?"
   - Emphasizes: Literary translation (meaning equivalence, not word-for-word)
   - Evaluation criteria:
     - `CORRECT`: English matches exactly (no more, no less)
     - `EXTRA_IN_ENGLISH`: English is TOO LONG (includes content from other Italian lines)
     - `EXTRA_IN_ITALIAN`: English is TOO SHORT (missing Italian content)

4. **Retry Logic (max 3 attempts):**
   - `EXTRA_IN_ENGLISH`: Clear history, re-extract with emphasis on SHORTER text
   - `EXTRA_IN_ITALIAN`: Clear history, retry with original prompt
   - Always re-extract from original Norton text (not from LLM's previous output)

5. **Position Verification:**
   - Check if extracted text appears at beginning of remaining Norton text
   - Allows minor punctuation differences (normalized comparison)

6. **Gap Detection & Block Completion:**
   - Replace matched words with "#"
   - Check prefix for alphabetic characters
   - Gap detected → Continue to next Italian line
   - No gap → Block complete

### Test Results

#### Test 1: Lines 1-3 (Initial Success)

**Input:** 3 Italian lines
**Output:** 2 blocks ✓

```
Block 1 (1 line):
  Italian: Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita
  English: Midway upon the road of our life

Block 2 (2 lines):
  Italian: mi ritrovai per una selva oscura,
          ché la diritta via era smarrita.
  English: I found myself within a dark wood, for the right way had been missed
```

**Key Success:**
- Variable-length blocks working correctly
- Line 2-3 correctly merged (Italian 2 lines = English 1 sentence)
- Validation successfully detected and corrected over-extraction in Line 2

#### Test 2: Lines 1-9 (Challenges)

**Issue:** Line 1 over-extraction persists across retries
- Extraction: `Midway upon the road of our life I found myself within a dark wood`
- Validation correctly detects: `EXTRA_IN_ENGLISH`
- Retry attempts produce same over-extraction
- Fails after 3 attempts

**Root Cause:** Small model (ministral-3:14b) has difficulty with fine-grained adjustments

### Current Status

**Working:**
- ✓ Structured output eliminates formatting issues (no extra quotes)
- ✓ LLM self-validation accurately detects over/under-extraction
- ✓ Variable-length blocks (multiple Italian lines → one English sentence)
- ✓ Gap detection prevents premature block completion
- ✓ Clean JSON-based validation logs

**Challenges:**
- ✗ Small model (14B) struggles with retry refinement
- ✗ When over-extraction occurs, retries often produce same result
- ✗ Line 1 over-extraction prevents processing of subsequent lines

**Model Limitations (ministral-3:14b):**
- Good at: Detecting problems (validation)
- Weak at: Refining extractions based on feedback
- Temperature: 0.3 (further reduction may help)

### Lessons Learned

1. **Structured output is essential:**
   - Eliminates parsing errors from free-form text
   - Forces consistent JSON format
   - Works well with Ollama via `create_json_descriptions_prompt`

2. **LLM self-validation works:**
   - Can accurately judge over/under-extraction
   - Concrete examples in prompts are critical
   - Simple rules ("TOO LONG" / "TOO SHORT") more effective than abstract concepts

3. **Small models have limits:**
   - Can validate well but struggle with fine corrections
   - May need larger model (70B+) for reliable retry success
   - Or need different retry strategy (not just "make it shorter")

4. **Re-extraction must use original source:**
   - Always extract from original Norton text
   - Never extract from LLM's previous output
   - Clear history on each retry to avoid confusion

### Next Steps

1. **Test with larger model:**
   - Try Qwen 2.5 70B or similar
   - May provide better retry refinement

2. **Alternative retry strategies:**
   - Provide specific word count limits
   - Show negative examples in retry prompt
   - Use different temperature for retries

3. **Fallback mechanism:**
   - If extraction fails after 3 attempts, try block-level validation
   - Or allow partial success and continue with warnings

4. **Test success rate:**
   - Run full canto with current approach
   - Measure: % of lines that succeed on first try, % that need retries, % that fail

---

## Improved Implementation (2026-02-05)

### Key Changes

**1. Hybrid Approach: Plain Text Extraction + Structured Validation**
- **Extraction:** Removed structured output (JSON schema) → Plain text output
  - Rationale: Structured output reduces LLM flexibility for extraction tasks
  - LLM outputs text directly, parsed as-is
- **Validation:** Kept structured output (JSON schema) with simplified YES/NO
  - `reason` field first → Chain of Thought (CoT)
  - `answer` field second → Final judgment
  - Rationale: Validation needs structured decision-making

**2. Fixed Island Detection Algorithm**
- Previous implementation had inverted logic
- Correct implementation (per PLAN.md):
  ```python
  # Find first alphabetic character
  first_alpha_idx = next((i for i, c in enumerate(test_text) if c.isalpha()), None)
  if first_alpha_idx is None:
      return True  # No unmatched text, block complete
  # Check if "#" appears after first alpha (= island)
  has_island = '#' in test_text[first_alpha_idx:]
  return not has_island  # Complete if no island
  ```

**3. Enhanced Prompts**
- **Extraction:** Added length hints based on Italian line count
- **Validation:** Emphasized literary translation tolerance
  - Minor nuance differences acceptable
  - Focus on content equivalence, not word-for-word matching

### Test Results (Lines 1-9)

**Success (Lines 1-3):**
- Line 1: "Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita" → "Midway upon the road of our life" ✓
- Line 2: "mi ritrovai per una selva oscura," → "I found myself within a dark wood" ✓
- Line 3: "ché la diritta via era smarrita." → "for the right way had been missed" ✓
- All succeeded on first attempt, no retries needed

**Partial Success (Lines 4-5):**
- Challenge: Lines 4-5 form a single English sentence
  - Italian: "Ahi quanto a dir qual era è cosa dura / esta selva selvaggia e aspra e forte"
  - English: "Ah! how hard a thing it is to tell what this wild and rough and dense wood was"
- Issue: Line 4 extraction includes Line 5 content
  - Extracted (Line 4 only): "Ah! how hard a thing it is to tell what this wild and rough and dense wood was"
  - Validation: YES (incorrect - should detect Line 5 content)
  - Length: IT=9 words, EN=18 words (2x ratio)
  - Island detection: False → Block marked complete (incorrect)
- Line 5 then fails (remaining text doesn't match)

### Current Challenge

**Validation Accuracy:**
- LLM validation accepts extractions that are too long
- Example: 18-word English for 9-word Italian
- LLM reasoning: "acceptable in literary translation"
- Need: More strict length validation or explicit multi-line detection

**Root Cause:**
- Italian poetry uses enjambment (lines break mid-sentence)
- Line 4 alone: "Ahi quanto a dir qual era è cosa dura" (how hard to say what it was)
- Line 4 includes "what it was" which naturally expands to "what this wild... wood was"
- LLM sees this as semantically valid, not detecting that the expansion comes from Line 5

### Possible Solutions

**1. Length Ratio Check:**
- Add hard constraint: English/Italian word ratio > 2.0 → reject
- Risk: May reject legitimate literary expansions

**2. Stricter Validation Prompt:**
- Explicitly ask: "Does the English include descriptive details not in this Italian line?"
- Emphasize: "Line 4 alone" vs "Lines 4-5 together"

**3. Multi-line Lookahead:**
- When extraction seems too long, check if next Italian line is needed
- Compare extraction against Lines 4-5 together

**4. Accept Current Behavior:**
- Lines 1-3 work perfectly
- Lines 4-5 represent edge case (enjambment with content expansion)
- May need human review for such cases

---

## Implementation Results (Updated)

### Current Implementation (alignment/align_canto.py)

**Approach:** Two-stage extraction with modern translation as semantic bridge

**Core Components:**

1. **Stage 1: Modern Translation**
   - Translate Italian to simple, modern English
   - Provides clear semantic reference independent of Norton's literary style
   - Single lines translated individually; multi-line blocks translated together

2. **Stage 2: Norton Text Extraction**
   - Use modern translation as meaning reference
   - Extract semantically equivalent text from Norton's literary translation
   - LLM matches meaning, not word-for-word

3. **Validation (Structured Output):**
   - Validates semantic equivalence between modern translation and extracted Norton text
   - Chain of Thought reasoning + YES/NO decision
   - Hard length ratio constraint (>1.8x rejects extraction)

4. **Enjambment Handling:**
   - When extraction fails with 1 line, automatically retry with N+1 lines
   - Successfully handles cases like Lines 4-5 where Italian poetry uses enjambment
   - Block expands until meaningful extraction succeeds

5. **Quote Stripping (Symmetric):**
   - Removes quotes ONLY when text is fully enclosed in matching quotes (e.g., `"text"` or `'text'`)
   - Preserves internal quotes and apostrophes (e.g., `don't`, `it's`, `Ah!`)
   - Uses plain text extraction (structured output caused over-extraction issues)

### Test Results (Lines 1-9)

**Success: 8 blocks from 9 lines**

```
Block 1 (1 line): Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita
                  → Midway upon the road of our life

Block 2 (1 line): mi ritrovai per una selva oscura,
                  → I found myself within a dark wood,

Block 3 (1 line): ché la diritta via era smarrita.
                  → for the right way had been missed.

Block 4 (2 lines): Ahi quanto a dir qual era è cosa dura / esta selva selvaggia e aspra e forte
                   → Ah! how hard a thing it is to tell what this wild and rough and dense wood was,
                   [Enjambment detected: 2 Italian lines → 1 English sentence]

Block 5 (1 line): che nel pensier rinova la paura!
                  → which in thought renews the fear!

Block 6 (1 line): Tant' è amara che poco è più morte;
                  → So bitter is it that death is little more.

Block 7 (1 line): ma per trattar del ben ch'i' vi trovai,
                  → But in order to treat of the good that there I found,

Block 8 (1 line): dirò de l'altre cose ch'i' v'ho scorte.
                  → I will tell of the other things that I have seen there.
```

**Key Success:**
- Lines 1-3: Perfect individual line alignment
- Lines 4-5: Automatic enjambment detection and merging
- Lines 6-9: Correct individual alignments

### Current Status

**Working:**
- ✓ Two-stage approach (modern translation → Norton extraction)
- ✓ Plain text extraction with symmetric quote stripping
- ✓ Punctuation restoration from original Norton text
- ✓ Semantic matching handles literary translation differences
- ✓ Automatic enjambment detection via retry mechanism
- ✓ Structured validation with length ratio guards

**Next Steps:**
1. Test with full canto (136 lines)
2. Measure success rate and identify edge cases
3. Optimize for speed (caching translations, parallel processing)
4. Add human review interface for uncertain alignments
